[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm William Henry.
And this is "Ascension Keepers."
Throughout the Pyrenees
Mountains of southern France
where the Cathars
lived, legends tell
of the appearance of a
lady in white who rides
the skies in an orb of light.
In French mythology or
folklore, Dames Blanches,
meaning literally white
ladies, were female spirits
or supernatural beings.
She's believed by many
to be the Virgin Mary.
If we view these legends
from the viewpoint
that the white lady is
the ascended Virgin who
has attained her light
body and that she
is the exemplar of the
Essene ascension practices,
these stories take
on a new dimension.
It suggests that Mary is phasing
in and out of this reality
as a light beam, maybe shifting
her density from a higher
vibrational world into
the density of Earth life.
Some may not be aware
that Mary is believed
to have ascended at all.
However, in Christian tradition,
going all the way back
to the apostles, it
is accepted as a fact.
What is disputed is when
this ascension occurred.
Believers in the Assumption
of Mary into heaven,
mainly Catholics and
Eastern Orthodox Christians,
say her body was
taken up into heaven
at the end of her earthly life.
Having completed
her earthly mission,
she was assumed, body and
soul, into heavenly glory
in a resurrected
body just like Jesus.
This indicates a change
in her state of being.
She has gone from earthly
flesh to celestial flesh
or a resurrection body.
The question is, was she
still alive when she ascended,
or had she died?
If she was alive, it suggests
that like Enoch and Jesus,
her body was transformed.
To me, this would
mean she attained
the rainbow body of light.
Others subscribe to the
Dormition or falling asleep
of the Virgin.
In this scenario, she is asleep
when Jesus comes for her soul.
No matter what one believes, the
icons, especially Russian icons
of Mary's ascension
from Earth are
stunning in their mystical
learnings and their connections
to our story.
In this ascension icon, Mary is
shown either asleep or deceased
on a bed surrounded by saints.
Jesus appears through an open
portal or gateway, a blue light
surrounded by angels.
I'm of the view that some kind
of interdimensional travel
is indicated.
According to orthodox
tradition, the Virgin Mary
died in the presence
of all the apostles
except Thomas, who is in India.
He returned to Jerusalem to
attend the Assumption of Mary,
but he was late to
arrive and visualize
that Mary's body had
been taken by angels.
Suffering from
doubts at that time,
the doubting Thomas,
as he was known,
requested Mary to give him
a sign in her memory, which
caused her chariot to stop
in midair and for Mary
to get her girdle to him.
Thomas is shown
receiving this girdle,
and then he showed it to
the other disciples of Jesus
and convinced them.
And then he took this girdle
on his subsequent journeys.
These images that feature
the ascension of Mary
and the transmission
of her girdle to Thomas
are among the most amazing
of all Christian images.
Jesus is always
portrayed emerging
from a portal or
a gate of light.
And the chariot
that Mary rides upon
is clearly the Merkabah
or throne chariot
of the Essene mystics,
indicating that Mary herself
was a Merkabah rider.
Just before she disappears
into another dimension,
she transmits her girdle or
this umbilical cord to Thomas.
The Book of Revelation
tells us that Mary
will return as the
woman of the apocalypse
or the woman clothed
with the sun, a view held
by the ancient Christian Church.
In an earlier episode, we
saw how Dante and the Cathars
venerated a beautiful woman
or lady of light, Beatrice.
In Dante's story,
she is the symbol
of the transcended part of our
spirit, the better part of us
that remains in heaven.
The white lady is this divine
feminine aspect of ourselves
who guides us upward and even to
ascend on the Merkabah throne,
as we saw Mary do
just a moment ago.
All the great ascension
keepers from Ezekiel, to Enoch,
to Isaiah, to Jesus,
and Dante included
have cleared the path that
leads us to her and from her
to the throne.
The white lady is Beatrice.
And all the women sung
by the troubadours,
says Dante scholar
Maria Soresina.
Every love song these mystical
poets, the troubadours wrote,
every love poem is
ultimately about her.
They believed the
cosmic white lady was
in every lady and every man.
And by loving a
special lady on Earth
or by loving another
person on Earth,
we were actually loving
that great divine lady.
So now we will explore the
story of Esclarmonde de Foix,
who is considered the high
priestess of the Cathars
and who took the
mantle of white lady.
Her name, Esclarmonde,
means light of the world.
She embodied the
Cathar teachings.
And her story reveals
a profound trail for us
to follow in our own quest
to recover the teachings
of these ascension keepers.
Our story takes us
to Toulouse, France.
In the 12th century, Toulouse or
Tolosa, as it was called then,
was the most prestigious city
in Europe after Venice and Rome.
It was sort of like a more
modern day Alexandria.
The counts of Toulouse
ruled over a vast area
that was not under the rule of
laws of the kingdom of France.
Toulouse made its own laws.
It made an island out of itself.
And the rules that
bound and constricted
mainland European
society, especially
the rules of the
Church, did not apply
to the citizens of
Occitan or the Languedoc,
as they were known.
In stark contrast
to other cultures,
women held positions in
society equal to those of men.
And the division between
the social classes
did not prohibit
an aspiring soul
from proving his or her worth
through admirable deeds.
We should therefore not
be surprised to learn
that here, ascension scholars
from three different cultures,
Jewish, Muslim, and
Christian, gathered
to learn from each
other and lived together
in harmony and friendship.
And it was from Toulouse
that the Cathars flourished.
From out of this gathering
stepped the troubadours,
a traveling ministry of
musicians, poets, and ascension
keepers.
Many of the troubadours
may have themselves
been Cathars or for certain were
influenced by Cathar teachings.
And among their highest
aims was to awaken the soul,
to revive the ascension
teachings of the past,
and to elevate women
and the divine feminine.
Their courts of love,
as they were known,
were established by the
troubadours, in which women
transcended their imposed
low status resulting
from the curse of Eve and
were all elevated to queens.
Courtly love was a conscious,
spiritual practice.
The ideal in courtly love was
to embody the archetypal forces
of lover and beloved.
The beloved was
usually the woman.
She was to embody the ideal of
the divine feminine, Sophia,
divine wisdom.
She was to be ever slightly
out of reach, but within sight.
Her presence was
to draw the lover
with her presence, her
goodness, her purity,
her feminine divinity.
She was to be a beacon, a light.
And in striving to embody
this for her lover,
she was to merge with
the divine she embodied.
Ultimately, this meant the
merger with the divine realm.
The lover was usually the man.
His was the more active role.
He was to seek his beloved,
his idealized lady of light.
He had to prove
himself worthy of her,
face great obstacles
with humility
and perseverance in her name.
In the lover's intense
passion for his beloved,
his constant focusing
on her, he was
to ultimately become a
perfect lover of the divine
and unite with the divinity he
saw embodied in his beloved.
The troubadours were
known for their red cloaks
that were embroidered at the
shoulder with a white dove.
The dove was a primary
symbol of the hidden church
of the Grail or the Holy Spirit
and especially represented
the divine feminine.
They also wore cloaks
emblazoned with the triple dot
symbol of the Chintamani,
the wish-fulfilling gem
that produces the light body.
This means they lived under
the dove of the Holy Spirit,
and they indeed
sought the light body.
The troubadours traveled from
court to court all over Europe,
carrying with them a secret
hermetic knowledge which they
embodied in the Grail legends
in which they called "La Gai
Science" or "La Gaie Savoir."
Gaie or Gau in the Provencal
dialect meant cock,
and the cock was one
of the main symbols
of the hermetic teachings,
partly because it announced
the coming of the dawn and
partly because it recalled
the denial of Christ by Peter
on the eve of his crucifixion,
Peter, who became the founder
of the Christian or Catholic
Church.
This tells us that
the troubadours
were reviving the secrets
of ascension hidden
in the text of the
ascension keepers
of the hermetic tradition.
The Church of Rome despised the
troubadours for this reason.
And while they did not
call themselves Cathars,
the troubadours
lived amongst them.
They both did the same thing.
They sought the
ultimate same end,
attainment of the light body
through the divine white lady.
The troubadours were highly
influential in the life
of the greatest Cathar Parfaits,
or perfected ones, if not
the greatest Cathar
high priestess
or even popess
Esclarmonde de Foix,
a beautiful and
well-educated noblewoman
who gave up a life of privilege
to further the Cathar cause.
She was born in 1154
to Countess Zebelia
Trencavel of Carcassonne and
her husband, Roger Bernard.
They named her Esclarmonde,
which in Occitan
means light of the world.
Her parents' court was a
portal of esoteric thinking
and the mysticism of ascension.
In her parents castle,
which looks like something
out of a fairy
tale, she would have
missed nothing of the visits
of these wandering minstrels,
the troubadours, and also the
quiet, black-robed priests
who accompanied them, priests
who were called the bonhommes,
and whose teachings spread
like wildfire from court
to court and village to
village in this part of France.
They were the Cathars.
Just imagine the
conversations that Esclarmonde
could have had with both the
troubadours and the Cathars.
When she was 12, destiny
called with a visit in 1167,
possibly arranged by the
Knights Templar of papa
Nicetas, the Bulgarian
bishop of Constantinople
and also patriarch
of the Cathar Church.
Papa Nicetas consecrated many
children of the Cathar nobility
to the Holy Spirit at
the great synod that
was organized to receive him.
Esclarmonde and her
brother, Raymond or Roger,
later count of Foix were
two of these children.
The light in
Esclarmonde was lit.
And by the time she
was in her teens,
she was celebrated
in poetry and song
for her beauty, her
intelligence, and her learning.
As scholar Anne Baring
observes, for the troubadour,
a chosen beloved woman
such as Esclarmonde
herself was the earthly image
of the divine wisdom or Sophia.
His one desire was to
serve this divine wisdom.
With his poetry and his
music, the troubadour
invoked not only the
image of Sophia herself,
the Holy Spirit
and consort of God,
but also the wisdom
of his own soul,
the wisdom of the
archetypal feminine
within every human being.
He strove to awaken his own
soul to the hidden wisdom
of the feminine,
seeing it reflected
in a chosen woman
whose beauty and gifts
seemed to incarnate the
qualities of Sophia.
Sophia was the
image of the wisdom
of God inherent in
the creative world,
the imminence of divine spirit
in all creation, in all of us.
After 25 years of marriage
during which Esclarmonde monde
had six children, three
girls and three boys,
her husband died.
She lived in a city called
Pamiers not far from Foix.
Her husband was a Catholic.
And it was believed that
the marriage was challenging
because of their different
religious allegiances,
but her husband was said to
have respected her beliefs
and even defended her against
the charge of heresy that was
repeatedly made against her.
Esclarmonde was now 50,
an older age in a time
when people
typically died at 30.
This is attributed to
her religious teachings
and her devotion
to the Cathar way.
Her children at this time
were grown up and married,
so she decided to return to
her childhood home at Foix.
Forsaking a life
of ease and comfort
with her family at
their estate, she
entrusted her entire
fortune to her children
and went to live and work
in Pamiers to better serve
her beliefs and the needs and
lives of the local inhabitants.
Under her leadership, convents
for perfect ones and schools,
where poor children were taught
the new spirit, were founded.
Led by her, the perfect
ones went to every home.
They assisted outcasts
and took care of the sick.
Unconstrained, the
people were won over
by their caring, charitable
ways and their pure form
of mysticism.
Esclarmonde was constantly
traveling and visiting
members of the nobility,
trying to persuade
them to stop their
feuding, instead
to prepare for the
coming genocide that was
to be unleashed by the pope.
She was ordained an ancient
or Parfait, a perfected one,
as the Cathar priests and
priestesses were called,
and also an archdeaconess.
It is interesting that alone
among the Christian sects,
the Cathars were the first
group since the gnostics
in the third century
to ordain women
as bishops, archdeaconesses,
and priestesses.
As Baring observes,
this may be one reason
why the movement was
so popular with women
and why so many married
men, once they had reached
middle age, asked their
husbands to release them
from their marriages
so they could
become active members
of the Cathar Church.
The Cathars evidently
succeeded in giving women
a respected and active social
role as teacher, priestess,
and healer.
There were even women surgeons,
for the Cathar ancients
were trained above all
in the arts of healing.
In 1208, Pope Innocent
III initiated the crusade
against the Cathars.
And as Esclarmonde
refused to submit herself
to the dominion of the
Roman Catholic Church,
the pope put a bounty
on her capture,
and the crusader knights
named her the Fox of Foix.
They never succeeded
in capturing her,
and ordinary people began to
call her Esclarmonde the Great.
She became, in this
way, the symbol
of the resistance
against the crusade.
According to some
legends, Esclarmonde
was on the run for
another 30 years,
sometimes sleeping
in caves and barns,
hunted like a wild animal.
In 1240, Esclarmonde died
at the great age of 85.
Again, it says a lot for
the Cathar way of life.
As I said, life
expectancy was 30.
No trace of her body
has ever been found,
but it was believed that she
was buried in a cave beneath
Montségur or possibly in one
of the caves of the Sabarthes,
where there was another
castle, Monreal,
the royal mountain also
associated with the Grail.
Esclarmonde was identified by
the German mystic Otto Rahn
as a historical precedent of
the protector of the Grail
in Eschenbach's "Parzival,"
which included the Grail
and the mountain of Mont
Sauvage or Montségur,
the home of the Cathars.
In "Parzival," the
whiteness of this character,
"Repanse de Schoye," the
Grail queen, is emphasized.
Quote, "So radiant
was her countenance
that everyone thought
the dawn was breaking."
As Anne Baring notes, the coat
of arms of the Sabarthes area
ruled by the counts of Foix
shows the motto [LATIN],,
guardians of the heights.
The device is strange and
interesting, she says.
It's a 16-rayed sun with a
winged cup at its center,
surrounded by a crown
of thorns and backed
by a pair of crossed spheres.
It's impossible not to connect
it with the cup of the Grail,
she says.
Interestingly, King
Arthur's wife, Guinevere,
whose name means white
spirit, is the continuation
of this white goddess
lineage or transmission.
Scholars say the original Welsh
form of the name Gwenhwyfar,
which seemed to be cognate
with your Irish name Findabair,
can be translated as the white
enchantress, or the white fae,
or ghost, having some connection
with a specter, or a phantom,
or a supernatural being.
We notice that with
these white ladies,
we are once again talking
about light beings.
Then of course, no
discussion of the white lady
could be complete
without mentioning
the White Tara of Buddhism.
She is considered
to be the goddess
of universal compassion,
who represents
virtuous and
enlightened activity.
Esclarmonde de Foix was
without doubt the inspiration
of the Cathar Church and
the heart of its resistance.
She has been immortalized
in the memory of the people
of the Ariege in the Pyrenees,
where the ruins of the castle
of Montségur still exist, as the
same dove that was the symbol
of the Church of the Holy
Spirit now symbolizes her.
This is where our story
dovetails with the white lady
myths of the Pyrenees because
the early 20th century
mythologist, Andre Mazano,
discovered 36 versions
of this tale in the Pyrenees.
They all go back to the
last day at Montségur when
Esclarmonde's fellow Cathars
perished in the fires of 1244.
Since then, her
spirit, in the form
of a pure white woman or a
dove, has been reportedly seen
by numerous Pyrenees
inhabitants, mostly children.
Is she the white lady
of these legends?
Did Esclarmonde ascend?
Or is it the Virgin Mary?
One of these encounters
with the white lady
led to the emergence of the
world's most visited healing
site.
On February 11, 1858, a
young 14-year-old girl
named Bernadette Soubirous
living in the Pyrenees
in Lourdes, witnessed the first
of 18 visions of her blessed
Virgin Mary at a
grotto near Lourdes.
Like Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and
we may say Esclarmonde de Foix,
is considered an
ascended being who
is capable of
phasing or appearing
in our light spectrum.
These appearances are
referred to as apparitions,
from the French word
meaning unclosing of heaven.
Apparition is used in
reference to an epiphany.
An epiphany is the
revealing of the Christ
child to the wise men, but
it's also the appearance
of a celestial being.
The first apparition
appeared when
Bernadette was gathering wood
with her sister and a friend.
Bernadette heard a noise
like a gust of wind
and looked up
towards the grotto.
She described what she saw.
I saw a lady dressed in white.
She wore a white dress,
an equally white veil,
a blue belt, and a
yellow rose on each foot.
Upon seeing the lady
who had a rosary draped
over her right arm, Bernadette
began praying the rosary.
And when the prayer ended,
the lady suddenly vanished.
On a subsequent visit to
the grotto, the lady spoke.
Bernadette asked the lady
to write down her name.
And the lady replied, it's
not necessary, and then added,
I do not promise to make
you happy in this world,
but in the next.
Would you be kind enough to come
here for a fortnight, she said.
In the weeks that
followed, there
were several more apparitions
of the lady at the grotto.
Mary would then
direct Bernadette
to dig in the earth
for a sacred spring.
Even though no such
water source was
known to exist at this
location, the girl
scratched a few
times in the ground
to bring forth the first drops
of an unsuspected gusher that
would soon produce some 25,000
gallons of water every day.
After five months of one-on-one
meetings with the Blessed
Virgin, the teenager
was subjected
to rigorous civil and clerical
inquiry by the Church.
Popular sentiment on behalf
of Bernadette's credibility
accelerated until the Catholic
Church officially admitted
to the validity of her claims
and recognized the cult
of Our Lady of Lourdes.
The scene of her
otherworldly encounters
was a grotto, a Delphic womb.
The white lady told Bernadette
that a regular procession
should be instituted
to the grotto,
reminiscent of the processions
at the Grail castle
and at Delphi in Greece.
A chapel to the cult
of Our Lady at Lourdes
was erected at the grotto,
just as the original Oracle
of Apollo in Greece
was worshipped
at a shrine near the
watery Korykion cave
after Kore, the Virgin.
Both Bernadette and
the Delphic Pythia
were naive young virgins
who fell into ecstasies
during which they
uttered words attributed
to a supernatural
being of light.
According to
Bernadette, and one day
she told me to eat a plant that
was growing at the same spot
where I was to drink only once.
These instructions
from the white lady
were identical to
a ritual procedure
at Delphi, where the
Pythia chewed a laurel leaf
and drank only once
from the holy spring
before Apollo spoke through her.
The white ladies
almost always live
near water, the energy
and the spirit of water
being deeply feminine.
Or less frequently
they live underground,
for the caves and
grottos represent
the eternally safe
mother's womb.
Today, Lourdes is a
world-renowned healing center.
Millions of people
visit every year
in search of
miraculous healings.
I have personally witnessed
powerful healing experiences
by guests on our
tours to Lourdes.
In fact, in February 2018
a miracle was officially
recognized, the
70th Lourdes miracle
recognized by the
Catholic Church.
While there have been more than
7,000 miraculous recoveries
attributed to the intercession
of Our Lady at Lourdes,
the white lady, only 70 cases
have been officially recognized
by the Catholic Church.
A miraculous recovery
must generally
be a complete, spontaneous,
and immediate healing
from a documented
medical condition.
Most recent miraculous
event involved a French nun,
sister Bernadette Moriau,
who went on a pilgrimage
to the shrine of Our
Lady at Lourdes in 2008.
She had been suffering from
spinal complications which
had rendered her
wheelchair bound
and fully disabled since 1980.
She also said she
had been taking
morphine to control the pain.
When Sister Moriau visited the
Lourdes shrine almost a decade
ago, she said she never
asked for a miracle,
according to the
Associated Press.
However, after attending
a blessing for the sick
at the shrine, something
began to change.
She says, I felt a surge of
well being throughout my body,
a relaxation, warmth.
I returned to my room.
And there, a voice told me
to take off your braces,
recalled the now
79-year-old nun.
Surprise, she said.
I could move, noting
that she instantaneously
walked away from her wheelchair,
braces, and pain medications.
The idea that the
waters of Lourdes
are infused with a
healing frequency
is more than interesting
to us who seek ascension.
In fact, this surge
is what happened
with the baptism
of Jesus, according
to the Gospel of Mark.
And it came to
pass in those days
that Jesus came from
Nazareth of Galilee
and was baptized by John, the
Essene master in the river
Jordan.
According to the
prophecies of Isaiah,
before the Messiah
or Christ could
manifest, as the
Essenes believed,
two things must occur.
One, a group of people
must prepare the way,
make straight the path,
and prepare the people.
And two, the eighth
century BC prophet Elijah
must reappear and
prepare the way,
and announce the
coming of the messiah.
The Essenes believed they
were this group of people
and John the Baptist,
the Essene initiate,
was the reincarnation of Elijah.
Importantly, the exact spot on
the bank of the Jordan River
where John baptized Jesus
is the exact same spot
where Elijah ascended into
heaven in the chariot of fire.
As Elijah was ascending
in his whirling chariot,
he transmitted his holy garment
to his disciple Elisha, who
carried on Elijah's teaching.
Was it an actual
garment, or was it
perhaps a frequency or
a vibration that Elijah
transmitted to Elisha?
In his article,
clothing metaphor
is a means of theological
expression in Syriac tradition.
Scholar Sebastian Brock tells
how fourth to seventh century
Syriac writers claimed
Adam's lost robe of glory
was deposited by Christ at his
baptism in the Jordan waters.
If this, in fact,
is a frequency,
it is telling us
that these avatars
can infuse earthly
waters with the frequency
of the light body.
And this is where I get my
surmise that perhaps Mary did
the same thing at Lourdes.
In the basilica at
Lourdes is a scene
that ties together the Essene,
gnostic, and Cathar view.
Mary is shown in ecstasy.
She is shown in the center
of a ring of initiates
with flames coming from
the top of their head,
indicating their
illuminated consciousness.
They are Essenes.
Manna or star food is falling
from the sky, perhaps, or more
likely summoned by Mary.
One thing is sure.
It takes a heightened
state of awareness
to perceive this celestial
substance, this star
food of the angels.
And as we can see, it emanates
from the illuminated dove,
the dove of the Holy
Spirit above Mary's head.
This image is a wonderful,
open eye meditation
on the expansion
of consciousness
the Essenes experienced.
It informs us once
again that there
is a hidden or
esoteric side to Mary
that those with eyes
to see can perceive.
This Mary is an illuminator
of the secrets of ascension
and the light body.
This Mary is an
ascension keeper.
What our investigation
shows us is
that we are part
of this long line,
this continuous transmission
of these seekers
of the light body,
these ascension keepers.
We can go to
southern France today
and walk in the path of the
Cathars, go to their castles,
feel the vibration of
these incredible places.
We can go to Lourdes
and bathe in the waters,
perhaps with the intention
of healing our physical body
or connecting our physical
body to our light bodies.
This is not an ancient
story any longer.
It is the calling of our times.
[MUSIC PLAYING]